README.md, before:

# cnspec

**Cloud Native Security and Compliance Auditing Framework**

`cnspec` is a cloud-native solution to assess the security and compliance of your business-critical infrastructure. Using [policy as code](https://mondoo.com/policy-as-code/), `cnspec` finds vulnerabilities and misconfigurations on all systems in your infrastructure including: public and private cloud environments, Kubernetes clusters, containers, container registries, servers and endpoints, SaaS products, infrastructure as code, APIs, and more.

`cnspec` is a powerful policy engine built on [`cnquery`](https://github.com/mondoohq/cnquery), and comes configured with default security policies that run right out of the box. It's both fast and simple to use!

```bash
cnspec scan local
```

**Sample output**
```bash
...

Controls:
✓ Pass:  Disable Media Sharing
✓ Pass:  Do not enable the "root" account
✓ Pass:  Disable Bluetooth Sharing
✕ Fail:  Enable security auditing
✓ Pass:  Enable Firewall
...
✕ Fail:  Ensure Firewall is configured to log
✓ Pass:  Ensure nfs server is not running.
✓ Pass:  Disable Content Caching
✕ Fail:  Ensure AirDrop Is Disabled
✓ Pass:  Control access to audit records


Summary
========================

Target:     user-macbook-pro
Score:      A    80/100     (100% completed)
✓ Passed:   ███████████ 70% (21)
✕ Failed:   ███ 17% (5)
! Errors:   ██ 13% (4)
» Skipped:  0% (0)

Policies:
A  80  macOS Security Baseline by Mondoo
```

## Installation

### Dependencies

Before building from source, be sure to install:

- [Go 1.19.0+](https://golang.org/dl/)
- [Protocol Buffers v21+](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/releases)

On macOS systems with Homebrew, run: `brew install go@1.19 protobuf`

### Build & install

To build and install cnspec using Go, run:

```bash
export GOPRIVATE="github.com/mondoohq,go.mondoo.com"
make cnspec/install
```

### Development

Whenever you change protos or other auto-generated files, you must regenerate files for the compiler. To do this, be sure you have the necessary tools installed (such as protobuf):

```bash
make prep
```

Then, whenever you make changes, just run:

```bash
make cnspec/generate
```

This generates and updates all required files for the build. Now you can `make cnspec/install` again as outlined above.

## Run a scan

Use the `cnspec scan` subcommand to check local and remote targets for misconfigurations and vulnerabilities.

### Local scan

This command evaluates the security of your local machine:

```bash
cnspec scan local
```

### Remote scan targets

You can also specify remote targets to scan. For example:

```bash
# to scan a docker image:
cnspec scan docker image ubuntu:22.04

# scan public ECR registry
aws ecr-public get-login-password --region us-east-1 | docker login --username AWS --password-stdin public.ecr.aws/r6z5b8t4
cnspec scan docker image public.ecr.aws/r6z5b8t4

# to scan an aws account using the local AWS config
cnspec scan aws

# to scan a kubernetes cluster via your local kubectl config
cnspec scan k8s

# to scan a GitHub repository
export GITHUB_TOKEN=<personal_access_token>
cnspec scan github repo <org/repo> 
```

## Policies

`cnspec` policies are built on the concept of [policy as code](https://mondoo.com/policy-as-code/). `cnspec` comes with default security policies configured for all supported targets. The default policies are available via the [cnspec-policies](https://github.com/mondoohq/cnspec-policies) GitHub repo.

### Custom policies

A `cnspec` policy is simply a YAML file that lets you express any security rule or best practice for your fleet. If you're interested in writing your own policies or contributing policies back to the `cnspec` community, the best place to start is to look at one of our example policies. You can find them in the [cnspec-policies](https://github.com/mondoohq/cnspec-policies) GitHub repo.

To run a policy you have developed locally:

```bash
cnspec scan local --policy-bundle policy/examples/example.mql.yaml
```

## cnspec interactive shell

`cnspec` also provides an interactive shell to explore assertions. It helps you understand the assertions that policies use, and write your own as well. It’s also a great way to interact with both local and remote targets on the fly.

### Local system shell

```bash
cnspec shell local
 .--. ,-.,-. .--. .---.  .--.  .--.™
'  ..': ,. :`._-.': .; `' '_.''  ..'
`.__.':_;:_;`.__.': ._.'`.__.'`.__.'
   mondoo™        : :
                  :_;
cnspec>
```

The shell provides a `help` command to get help on the resources that power `cnspec`. Running `help` without any arguments lists all of the available resources and their fields. You can also run `help <resource>` to get more information on a specific resource. For example:

```bash
cnquery> help ports
ports:              TCP/IP ports on the system
  list []port:      TCP/IP ports on the system
  listening []port: TCP/IP ports on the system
```

The shell uses auto-complete, which makes it easy to explore. Once inside the shell, you can enter MQL assertions like this:

```coffeescript
> ports.listening.none( port == 23 )
```

To clear the terminal, type `clear`. 

To exit, either hit CTRL + D or type `exit`.

## Scale cnspec across your fleet

The easiest way to scale `cnspec` across your fleet is to have all of your infrastructure pull policies from a central location. A simple approach is to sign up for a free account on Mondoo Platform. The platform is designed for multi-tenancy and provides a secure, private environment that keeps data about your assets in your own account. With the platform, all assets can report on policies and you can define custom exceptions for your fleet.

To use `cnspec` with the Mondoo Platform, run:

```bash
cnspec auth login
```

Once authenticated, you can scan any target:

```bash
cnspec scan <target>
```

`cnspec` returns the results from the scan to `STDOUT` and to the platform.

### Upload policies to your account

With an account on Mondoo Platform, you can upload policies:

```bash
cnspec policy upload mypolicy.mql.yaml
```

## Where to go from here

There are so many things `cnspec` can do, from testing your entire fleet for vulnerabilities to gathering information and creating reports for auditors. With its custom policies, `cnspec` can scan any component you care about!

Explore our:

- Policy Marketplace
- [Policy as Code](https://mondoo.com/docs/tutorials/mondoo/policy-as-code/)
- [MQL introduction](https://mondoohq.github.io/mql-intro/index.html)
- [MQL resource packs](https://mondoo.com/docs/references/mql/)
- [cnquery](https://github.com/mondoohq/cnquery), our open source, cloud-native asset inventory tool
- [HashiCorp Packer plugin](https://github.com/mondoohq/packer-plugin-mondoo) to integrate `cnspec` with HashiCorp Packer!

## Community and support

Our goal is to secure all layers of your infrastructure. If you need support, or want to get involved with the development of `cnspec`, join our [community](https://github.com/orgs/mondoohq/discussions) today and let’s grow it together! 

## Troubleshooting

### Private repository access

If you see this error:

```
fatal: could not read Username for 'https://github.com': terminal prompts disabled
Confirm the import path was entered correctly.
```

It is caused by the repository currently being private. It'll be publish soon, but while it's still private, you need to configure your gitconfig to use SSH to download the repo:

```
[url "ssh://git@github.com/"]
	insteadOf = https://github.com/
```

## Development

We love emojis in our commits. These are their meanings:

🛑 breaking 🐛 bugfix 🧹 cleanup/internals 📄 docs  
✨⭐🌟🎉 smaller or larger features 🐎 race condition  
🌙 MQL 🌈 visual 🍏 fix tests 🎫 auth 🦅 falcon 🐳 container  

## Legal

- **Copyright:** 2018-2022, Mondoo Inc, proprietary
- **Authors:** Christoph Hartmann, Dominik Richter

Commit message:

🧹 update install instructions (#43)
- use simple installation script
- move development setup into docs directory

Signed-off-by: Christoph Hartmann <chris@lollyrock.com>

Signed-off-by: Christoph Hartmann <chris@lollyrock.com>

README.md, after:

# cnspec

**Cloud Native Security and Compliance Auditing Framework**

`cnspec` is a cloud-native solution to assess the security and compliance of your business-critical infrastructure. Using [policy as code](https://mondoo.com/policy-as-code/), `cnspec` finds vulnerabilities and misconfigurations on all systems in your infrastructure including: public and private cloud environments, Kubernetes clusters, containers, container registries, servers and endpoints, SaaS products, infrastructure as code, APIs, and more.

`cnspec` is a powerful policy engine built on [`cnquery`](https://github.com/mondoohq/cnquery), and comes configured with default security policies that run right out of the box. It's both fast and simple to use!

```bash
cnspec scan local
```

**Sample output**
```bash
...

Controls:
✓ Pass:  Disable Media Sharing
✓ Pass:  Do not enable the "root" account
✓ Pass:  Disable Bluetooth Sharing
✕ Fail:  Enable security auditing
✓ Pass:  Enable Firewall
...
✕ Fail:  Ensure Firewall is configured to log
✓ Pass:  Ensure nfs server is not running.
✓ Pass:  Disable Content Caching
✕ Fail:  Ensure AirDrop Is Disabled
✓ Pass:  Control access to audit records


Summary
========================

Target:     user-macbook-pro
Score:      A    80/100     (100% completed)
✓ Passed:   ███████████ 70% (21)
✕ Failed:   ███ 17% (5)
! Errors:   ██ 13% (4)
» Skipped:  0% (0)

Policies:
A  80  macOS Security Baseline by Mondoo
```

## Installation

Install `cnspec` with our installation script:

```bash
bash -c "$(curl -sSL https://install.mondoo.com/sh/cnspec)"
```

If you prefer a package, find it on [GitHub releases](https://github.com/mondoohq/cnspec/releases).


## Run a scan

Use the `cnspec scan` subcommand to check local and remote targets for misconfigurations and vulnerabilities.

### Local scan

This command evaluates the security of your local machine:

```bash
cnspec scan local
```

### Remote scan targets

You can also specify remote targets to scan. For example:

```bash
# to scan a docker image:
cnspec scan docker image ubuntu:22.04

# scan public ECR registry
aws ecr-public get-login-password --region us-east-1 | docker login --username AWS --password-stdin public.ecr.aws/r6z5b8t4
cnspec scan docker image public.ecr.aws/r6z5b8t4

# to scan an aws account using the local AWS config
cnspec scan aws

# to scan a kubernetes cluster via your local kubectl config
cnspec scan k8s

# to scan a GitHub repository
export GITHUB_TOKEN=<personal_access_token>
cnspec scan github repo <org/repo> 
```

## Policies

`cnspec` policies are built on the concept of [policy as code](https://mondoo.com/policy-as-code/). `cnspec` comes with default security policies configured for all supported targets. The default policies are available via the [cnspec-policies](https://github.com/mondoohq/cnspec-policies) GitHub repo.

### Custom policies

A `cnspec` policy is simply a YAML file that lets you express any security rule or best practice for your fleet. If you're interested in writing your own policies or contributing policies back to the `cnspec` community, the best place to start is to look at one of our example policies. You can find them in the [cnspec-policies](https://github.com/mondoohq/cnspec-policies) GitHub repo.

To run a policy you have developed locally:

```bash
cnspec scan local --policy-bundle policy/examples/example.mql.yaml
```

## cnspec interactive shell

`cnspec` also provides an interactive shell to explore assertions. It helps you understand the assertions that policies use, and write your own as well. It’s also a great way to interact with both local and remote targets on the fly.

### Local system shell

```bash
cnspec shell local
 .--. ,-.,-. .--. .---.  .--.  .--.™
'  ..': ,. :`._-.': .; `' '_.''  ..'
`.__.':_;:_;`.__.': ._.'`.__.'`.__.'
   mondoo™        : :
                  :_;
cnspec>
```

The shell provides a `help` command to get help on the resources that power `cnspec`. Running `help` without any arguments lists all of the available resources and their fields. You can also run `help <resource>` to get more information on a specific resource. For example:

```bash
cnquery> help ports
ports:              TCP/IP ports on the system
  list []port:      TCP/IP ports on the system
  listening []port: TCP/IP ports on the system
```

The shell uses auto-complete, which makes it easy to explore. Once inside the shell, you can enter MQL assertions like this:

```coffeescript
> ports.listening.none( port == 23 )
```

To clear the terminal, type `clear`. 

To exit, either hit CTRL + D or type `exit`.

## Scale cnspec across your fleet

The easiest way to scale `cnspec` across your fleet is to have all of your infrastructure pull policies from a central location. A simple approach is to sign up for a free account on Mondoo Platform. The platform is designed for multi-tenancy and provides a secure, private environment that keeps data about your assets in your own account. With the platform, all assets can report on policies and you can define custom exceptions for your fleet.

To use `cnspec` with the Mondoo Platform, run:

```bash
cnspec auth login
```

Once authenticated, you can scan any target:

```bash
cnspec scan <target>
```

`cnspec` returns the results from the scan to `STDOUT` and to the platform.

### Upload policies to your account

With an account on Mondoo Platform, you can upload policies:

```bash
cnspec policy upload mypolicy.mql.yaml
```

## Where to go from here

There are so many things `cnspec` can do, from testing your entire fleet for vulnerabilities to gathering information and creating reports for auditors. With its custom policies, `cnspec` can scan any component you care about!

Explore our:

- Policy Marketplace
- [Policy as Code](https://mondoo.com/docs/tutorials/mondoo/policy-as-code/)
- [MQL introduction](https://mondoohq.github.io/mql-intro/index.html)
- [MQL resource packs](https://mondoo.com/docs/references/mql/)
- [cnquery](https://github.com/mondoohq/cnquery), our open source, cloud-native asset inventory tool
- [HashiCorp Packer plugin](https://github.com/mondoohq/packer-plugin-mondoo) to integrate `cnspec` with HashiCorp Packer!

## Community and support

Our goal is to secure all layers of your infrastructure. If you need support, or want to get involved with the development of `cnspec`, join our [community](https://github.com/orgs/mondoohq/discussions) today and let’s grow it together! 

## Troubleshooting

### Private repository access

If you see this error:

```
fatal: could not read Username for 'https://github.com': terminal prompts disabled
Confirm the import path was entered correctly.
```

It is caused by the repository currently being private. It'll be publish soon, but while it's still private, you need to configure your gitconfig to use SSH to download the repo:

```
[url "ssh://git@github.com/"]
	insteadOf = https://github.com/
```

## Development

We love emojis in our commits. These are their meanings:

🛑 breaking 🐛 bugfix 🧹 cleanup/internals 📄 docs  
✨⭐🌟🎉 smaller or larger features 🐎 race condition  
🌙 MQL 🌈 visual 🍏 fix tests 🎫 auth 🦅 falcon 🐳 container  

## Legal

- **Copyright:** 2018-2022, Mondoo Inc, proprietary
- **Authors:** Christoph Hartmann, Dominik Richter
