docs/saas/google_workspace.mdx, before:

---
title: Assess Google Workspace Security with cnspec
sidebar_label: Google Workspace
sidebar_position: 20
displayed_sidebar: cnspec
description: Set up cnspec to perform security scans of Google Workspace
---

Rely on cnspec to audit and enforce policy for your Google Workspace environment.

## Before you begin

Be sure you have the required access:

- Super administrator access to [Google Workspace Admin Console](https://admin.google.com)
- Administrator access to [Google Cloud Console](https://console.cloud.google.com/)

## Create a Google Cloud service account

<Callout type="info">

These steps for configuring [Admin SDK API](https://developers.google.com/admin-sdk) access to your
Google Workspace environment rely on Google Cloud (GCP) even if you aren't otherwise using GCP.

</Callout>

### Step A: Create a Google Cloud Project

1. Go to [Google Cloud](https://console.cloud.google.com/) and sign in as a super administrator. If it's your first time signing into the console, agree to the terms of service.

2. From the Google Cloud menu, select **IAM & Admin** > **Manage Resources**.

3. At the top, select **Create Project** and enter a project name (such as Mondoo Security Scan).

   If you want, you can add the project to a folder: For Location, select Browse, navigate to the folder, and choose Select.

4. Select **Create**.

### Step B: Enable the required APIs to scan Google Workspace

1. From the Google Cloud menu, select **APIs & Services** > **Library**.

2. For each of these APIs, select the API name and then select **Enable**:
   - Admin SDK
   - Google Calendar API
   - Contacts API
   - Gmail API
   - Groups Migration API
   - Cloud Identity API
   - Google Drive API

<Callout type="tip">

If you don't see the API you need, type its name in the search box.

</Callout>

### Step C: Set up the OAuth consent screen

1. From the Google Cloud menu, select **APIs & Services** > **OAuth consent screen**.

2. For **User Type**, select **Internal**.

3. Select **Create**.

4. For **App name**, enter "Mondoo Security Scanner" or another name that makes sense for your organization.

5. For **Authorized Domains**, select **+ ADD DOMAIN** and enter your domain configured in Google Workspace.

6. Select a **User support email** for users to contact with questions.

7. For **Developer contact information**, enter email addresses so Google can contact you about changes to your project.

8. Select **Save and Continue** > **Save** and then select **Continue** > **Back to Dashboard**.

### Step D: Create the service account

1. From the Google Cloud menu, select **APIs & Services** > **Credentials**.

2. Select **Create Credentials** > **Service account**.

3. For **Service account name**, enter "mondoo-security-scanner" or another name that makes sense for your organization.

   If you want, you can also add a **Service account description**.

4. Select **Create** and select **Continue**.

5. Select **Done** > **Save**.

6. At the top, select **Key** > **Add Key** > **Create new key**.

7. Make sure the key type is set to **JSON**, then select **Create**. You see a message that the service account's private key JSON file was downloaded to your computer. Note the file name and where your browser saves it. You need it for later steps.

8. Select **Close**.

   ![Google Service Account Client ID](/img/cnspec/gw/gw-service-account-id.png)

9. Record the **OAuth 2 / Client ID** from the list of service accounts. You need that for the next step.

## Configure domain-wide delegation in Google Workspace Admin Console

In this next section you configure domain-wide delegation in Google Workspace Admin console to give your new service account the access it needs the Google Workspace APIs.

1. Log into the [Google Workspace Admin Console](https://admin.google.com).

2. In the left-side navigation, select **Security** > **Access and data control** > **API controls**.

3. Select **Domain-wide Delegation** and then select **Add new**.

4. For the **Client ID**, enter the client ID your recorded in Step D above.

5. For **OAuth Scopes**, paste this comma-delimited list to add all 16 read-only OAuth scopes:

   ```text
   https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.chrome.printers.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.customer.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.device.chromeos.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.device.mobile.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.domain.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.group.member.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.group.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.orgunit.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.resource.calendar.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.rolemanagement.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.user.alias.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.user.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.userschema.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.reports.audit.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.reports.usage.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.user.security,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/cloud-identity.groups.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/calendar.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/calendar,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/calendar.events,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/calendar.events.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/calendar.settings.readonly
   ```

6. Select **Authorize**.

### Super admin role email

To use your Google Cloud service account with domain-wide delegation, you must specify a super admin role email to impersonate when authenticating to the API.

In the [Google Workspace Admin Console](https://admin.google.com), navigate to **Account** > **Admin Roles** and select **Super Admins**. Record the email address for the Super Admin you want to use when authenticating.

To learn more about super admin roles, read [Prebuilt administrator roles](https://support.google.com/a/answer/2405986) in the Google Workspace documentation.

### Record your Google Workspace customer ID

Navigate to **Account** > **Account Settings** and record the **Customer ID**. You need the customer ID to configure hosted scanning in Mondoo Platform, or to use locally with cnspec or cnquery.

![Google Workspace Customer ID](/img/cnspec/gw/gw-customer-id.png)

## Use cnspec shell to test your configuration

To test proper configuration, use the cnspec shell to run a sample query:

```bash
cnspec shell google-workspace --customer-id 5amp13iD --impersonated-user-email admin@domain.com --credentials-path /home/user/my-project-6646123456789.json
```

| For...                      | Substitute...                                               |
| --------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- |
| `--impersonated-user-email` | The email address of a user that has super admin privileges |
| `--credentials-path`        | The path to the downloaded JSON credentials file            |

cnspec returns results similar to these:

```coffeescript
cnspec> googleworkspace.users
googleworkspace.users: [
  0: {
    primaryEmail: "alice@smith.family"
  }
  1: {
    primaryEmail: "betty@smith.family"
  }
  ....
```

If you prefer, you can use any of these environment variables to provide the credentials file. They're listed in order of precedence:

- `GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS`
- `GOOGLEWORKSPACE_CREDENTIALS`
- `GOOGLEWORKSPACE_CLOUD_KEYFILE_JSON`
- `GOOGLE_CREDENTIALS`

<Callout type="info">

If any of the variables above and the `--credentials-path` parameter are both present, the environment variable takes precedence.

</Callout>

```text
$ export GOOGLEWORKSPACE_CLOUD_KEYFILE_JSON=/home/user/my-project-6646123456789.json
$ cnspec shell google-workspace --customer-id 5amp13iD --impersonated-user-email admin@domain.com
  ___ _ __  ___ _ __   ___  ___
 / __| '_ \/ __| '_ \ / _ \/ __|
| (__| | | \__ \ |_) |  __/ (__
 \___|_| |_|___/ .__/ \___|\___|
   mondoo™     |_|
cnspec> googleworkspace.users
googleworkspace.users: [
  0: {
    primaryEmail: "alice@smith.family"
  }
  1: {
    primaryEmail: "betty@smith.family"
  }
  ....
```

## Example queries and checks

Display details for the first user in the workspace:

```coffeescript
cnspec> googleworkspace.users[0]{ * }
googleworkspace.users[0]: {
  isMailboxSetup: true
  familyName: "Smith"
  suspensionReason: ""
  recoveryEmail: ""
  archived: false
  aliases: []
  isAdmin: false
  lastLoginTime: 2023-01-03 20:45:12 +0000 UTC
  agreedToTerms: true
  suspended: false
  isEnrolledIn2Sv: false
  fullName: "Alice Smith"
  recoveryPhone: ""
  primaryEmail: "alice@smith.family"
  givenName: "Alice"
  id: "1182761XXXXXXXXX"
  tokens: [
  0: googleworkspace.token displayText="iOS Account Manager"
  1: googleworkspace.token displayText="Facetune2"
  2: googleworkspace.token displayText="YouTube on TV"
  3: googleworkspace.token displayText="Discord"
  4: googleworkspace.token displayText="Google Chrome"
  5: googleworkspace.token displayText="Epic Games, Inc."
  6: googleworkspace.token displayText="the-game-awards"
  ]
  creationTime: 2021-11-30 04:31:25 +0000 UTC
  isEnforcedIn2Sv: false
  usageReport: googleworkspace.report.usage id = googleworkspace.report.usage/C013XXXXXX/118276124783XXXXXXXXX/2023-01-03
}
```

Notice that `usageReport` is listed in this example output. This provides access to several reports with more useful user data that you can also check.

For example, this retrieves the first user in the workspace's account usage data:

```coffeescript
cnspec> googleworkspace.users[0].usageReport.account
googleworkspace.users[0].usageReport.account: {
  adminSetName: "Alice Smith"
  driveUsedQuotaInMb: 231.000000
  gmailUsedQuotaInMb: 39.000000
  is2SvEnforced: false
  isDisabled: false
  isLessSecureAppsAccessAllowed: false
  isS2SvEnrolled: false
  isSuperAdmin: false
  passwordLengthCompliance: "COMPLIANT"
  passwordStrength: "STRONG"
  usedQuotaInMb: 270.000000
}
```

You can also create checks against the Google Workspace data.

This checks assures all users have passwords that Google considers strong and compliant:

```coffeescript
googleworkspace.users{
  usageReport.account {
    _['passwordStrength'] == "STRONG"
    _['passwordLengthCompliance'] == "COMPLIANT"
  }
}
```

Example response data:

```coffeescript
googleworkspace.users: [
  0: {
    usageReport.account: {
      [passwordLengthCompliance] == "COMPLIANT": true
      [passwordStrength] == "STRONG": true
    }
  }
  1: {
    usageReport.account: {
      [passwordLengthCompliance] == "COMPLIANT": true
      [passwordStrength] == "STRONG": true
    }
  }
```

## Learn more

- To learn more about how the MQL query language works, read [Write Effective MQL](/mql/mql-write/).

- To learn more about the information Mondoo can retrieve from Google Workspace, explore the complete [Mondoo Google Workspace Resource Pack Reference](/mql/resources/google-workspace/).

---

Commit message:

Improve scan scans for cloud/saas
Fill in some usage details here

Signed-off-by: Tim Smith <tsmith84@gmail.com>

docs/saas/google_workspace.mdx, after:

---
title: Assess Google Workspace Security with cnspec
sidebar_label: Google Workspace
sidebar_position: 20
displayed_sidebar: cnspec
description: Set up cnspec to perform security scans of Google Workspace
---

Rely on cnspec to audit and enforce policy for your Google Workspace environment.

## Before you begin

Be sure you have the required access:

- Super administrator access to [Google Workspace Admin Console](https://admin.google.com)
- Administrator access to [Google Cloud Console](https://console.cloud.google.com/)

## Create a Google Cloud service account

<Callout type="info">

These steps for configuring [Admin SDK API](https://developers.google.com/admin-sdk) access to your
Google Workspace environment rely on Google Cloud (GCP) even if you aren't otherwise using GCP.

</Callout>

### Step A: Create a Google Cloud Project

1. Go to [Google Cloud](https://console.cloud.google.com/) and sign in as a super administrator. If it's your first time signing into the console, agree to the terms of service.

2. From the Google Cloud menu, select **IAM & Admin** > **Manage Resources**.

3. At the top, select **Create Project** and enter a project name (such as Mondoo Security Scan).

   If you want, you can add the project to a folder: For Location, select Browse, navigate to the folder, and choose Select.

4. Select **Create**.

### Step B: Enable the required APIs to scan Google Workspace

1. From the Google Cloud menu, select **APIs & Services** > **Library**.

2. For each of these APIs, select the API name and then select **Enable**:
   - Admin SDK
   - Google Calendar API
   - Contacts API
   - Gmail API
   - Groups Migration API
   - Cloud Identity API
   - Google Drive API

<Callout type="tip">

If you don't see the API you need, type its name in the search box.

</Callout>

### Step C: Set up the OAuth consent screen

1. From the Google Cloud menu, select **APIs & Services** > **OAuth consent screen**.

2. For **User Type**, select **Internal**.

3. Select **Create**.

4. For **App name**, enter "Mondoo Security Scanner" or another name that makes sense for your organization.

5. For **Authorized Domains**, select **+ ADD DOMAIN** and enter your domain configured in Google Workspace.

6. Select a **User support email** for users to contact with questions.

7. For **Developer contact information**, enter email addresses so Google can contact you about changes to your project.

8. Select **Save and Continue** > **Save** and then select **Continue** > **Back to Dashboard**.

### Step D: Create the service account

1. From the Google Cloud menu, select **APIs & Services** > **Credentials**.

2. Select **Create Credentials** > **Service account**.

3. For **Service account name**, enter "mondoo-security-scanner" or another name that makes sense for your organization.

   If you want, you can also add a **Service account description**.

4. Select **Create** and select **Continue**.

5. Select **Done** > **Save**.

6. At the top, select **Key** > **Add Key** > **Create new key**.

7. Make sure the key type is set to **JSON**, then select **Create**. You see a message that the service account's private key JSON file was downloaded to your computer. Note the file name and where your browser saves it. You need it for later steps.

8. Select **Close**.

   ![Google Service Account Client ID](/img/cnspec/gw/gw-service-account-id.png)

9. Record the **OAuth 2 / Client ID** from the list of service accounts. You need that for the next step.

## Configure domain-wide delegation in Google Workspace Admin Console

In this next section you configure domain-wide delegation in Google Workspace Admin console to give your new service account the access it needs the Google Workspace APIs.

1. Log into the [Google Workspace Admin Console](https://admin.google.com).

2. In the left-side navigation, select **Security** > **Access and data control** > **API controls**.

3. Select **Domain-wide Delegation** and then select **Add new**.

4. For the **Client ID**, enter the client ID your recorded in Step D above.

5. For **OAuth Scopes**, paste this comma-delimited list to add all 16 read-only OAuth scopes:

   ```text
   https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.chrome.printers.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.customer.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.device.chromeos.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.device.mobile.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.domain.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.group.member.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.group.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.orgunit.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.resource.calendar.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.rolemanagement.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.user.alias.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.user.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.userschema.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.reports.audit.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.reports.usage.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.user.security,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/cloud-identity.groups.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/calendar.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/calendar,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/calendar.events,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/calendar.events.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/calendar.settings.readonly
   ```

6. Select **Authorize**.

### Super admin role email

To use your Google Cloud service account with domain-wide delegation, you must specify a super admin role email to impersonate when authenticating to the API.

In the [Google Workspace Admin Console](https://admin.google.com), navigate to **Account** > **Admin Roles** and select **Super Admins**. Record the email address for the Super Admin you want to use when authenticating.

To learn more about super admin roles, read [Prebuilt administrator roles](https://support.google.com/a/answer/2405986) in the Google Workspace documentation.

### Record your Google Workspace customer ID

Navigate to **Account** > **Account Settings** and record the **Customer ID**. You need the customer ID to configure hosted scanning in Mondoo Platform, or to use locally with cnspec or cnquery.

![Google Workspace Customer ID](/img/cnspec/gw/gw-customer-id.png)

## Scan Google Workspace

To scan your Google Workspace environment against security policies:

```bash
cnspec scan google-workspace --customer-id 5amp13iD --impersonated-user-email admin@domain.com --credentials-path /home/user/my-project-6646123456789.json
```

| For...                      | Substitute...                                               |
| --------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- |
| `--customer-id`             | The Google Workspace customer ID from the Admin Console     |
| `--impersonated-user-email` | The email address of a user that has super admin privileges |
| `--credentials-path`        | The path to the downloaded JSON credentials file            |

## Use cnspec shell to test your configuration

To test proper configuration, use the cnspec shell to run a sample query:

```bash
cnspec shell google-workspace --customer-id 5amp13iD --impersonated-user-email admin@domain.com --credentials-path /home/user/my-project-6646123456789.json
```

| For...                      | Substitute...                                               |
| --------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- |
| `--impersonated-user-email` | The email address of a user that has super admin privileges |
| `--credentials-path`        | The path to the downloaded JSON credentials file            |

cnspec returns results similar to these:

```coffeescript
cnspec> googleworkspace.users
googleworkspace.users: [
  0: {
    primaryEmail: "alice@smith.family"
  }
  1: {
    primaryEmail: "betty@smith.family"
  }
  ....
```

If you prefer, you can use any of these environment variables to provide the credentials file. They're listed in order of precedence:

- `GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS`
- `GOOGLEWORKSPACE_CREDENTIALS`
- `GOOGLEWORKSPACE_CLOUD_KEYFILE_JSON`
- `GOOGLE_CREDENTIALS`

<Callout type="info">

If any of the variables above and the `--credentials-path` parameter are both present, the environment variable takes precedence.

</Callout>

```text
$ export GOOGLEWORKSPACE_CLOUD_KEYFILE_JSON=/home/user/my-project-6646123456789.json
$ cnspec shell google-workspace --customer-id 5amp13iD --impersonated-user-email admin@domain.com
  ___ _ __  ___ _ __   ___  ___
 / __| '_ \/ __| '_ \ / _ \/ __|
| (__| | | \__ \ |_) |  __/ (__
 \___|_| |_|___/ .__/ \___|\___|
   mondoo™     |_|
cnspec> googleworkspace.users
googleworkspace.users: [
  0: {
    primaryEmail: "alice@smith.family"
  }
  1: {
    primaryEmail: "betty@smith.family"
  }
  ....
```

## Example queries and checks

Display details for the first user in the workspace:

```coffeescript
cnspec> googleworkspace.users[0]{ * }
googleworkspace.users[0]: {
  isMailboxSetup: true
  familyName: "Smith"
  suspensionReason: ""
  recoveryEmail: ""
  archived: false
  aliases: []
  isAdmin: false
  lastLoginTime: 2023-01-03 20:45:12 +0000 UTC
  agreedToTerms: true
  suspended: false
  isEnrolledIn2Sv: false
  fullName: "Alice Smith"
  recoveryPhone: ""
  primaryEmail: "alice@smith.family"
  givenName: "Alice"
  id: "1182761XXXXXXXXX"
  tokens: [
  0: googleworkspace.token displayText="iOS Account Manager"
  1: googleworkspace.token displayText="Facetune2"
  2: googleworkspace.token displayText="YouTube on TV"
  3: googleworkspace.token displayText="Discord"
  4: googleworkspace.token displayText="Google Chrome"
  5: googleworkspace.token displayText="Epic Games, Inc."
  6: googleworkspace.token displayText="the-game-awards"
  ]
  creationTime: 2021-11-30 04:31:25 +0000 UTC
  isEnforcedIn2Sv: false
  usageReport: googleworkspace.report.usage id = googleworkspace.report.usage/C013XXXXXX/118276124783XXXXXXXXX/2023-01-03
}
```

Notice that `usageReport` is listed in this example output. This provides access to several reports with more useful user data that you can also check.

For example, this retrieves the first user in the workspace's account usage data:

```coffeescript
cnspec> googleworkspace.users[0].usageReport.account
googleworkspace.users[0].usageReport.account: {
  adminSetName: "Alice Smith"
  driveUsedQuotaInMb: 231.000000
  gmailUsedQuotaInMb: 39.000000
  is2SvEnforced: false
  isDisabled: false
  isLessSecureAppsAccessAllowed: false
  isS2SvEnrolled: false
  isSuperAdmin: false
  passwordLengthCompliance: "COMPLIANT"
  passwordStrength: "STRONG"
  usedQuotaInMb: 270.000000
}
```

You can also create checks against the Google Workspace data.

This checks assures all users have passwords that Google considers strong and compliant:

```coffeescript
googleworkspace.users{
  usageReport.account {
    _['passwordStrength'] == "STRONG"
    _['passwordLengthCompliance'] == "COMPLIANT"
  }
}
```

Example response data:

```coffeescript
googleworkspace.users: [
  0: {
    usageReport.account: {
      [passwordLengthCompliance] == "COMPLIANT": true
      [passwordStrength] == "STRONG": true
    }
  }
  1: {
    usageReport.account: {
      [passwordLengthCompliance] == "COMPLIANT": true
      [passwordStrength] == "STRONG": true
    }
  }
```

## Learn more

- To learn more about how the MQL query language works, read [Write Effective MQL](/mql/mql-write/).

- To learn more about the information Mondoo can retrieve from Google Workspace, explore the complete [Mondoo Google Workspace Resource Pack Reference](/mql/resources/google-workspace/).

---
